That's it.
There we go.
Very good.
Nice and slow.
Why not nice and slow.
There you go.
Okay, we were talking about Chester.
Well, I was only talking about Chester and his enthusiasm for kind of other people's... Bon Moe and other people's kind of... Well, yeah, Bon Moe.
He had a...
framed statement that he hung up in New Haven, and he gave us a framed copy of it.
Kate will know where it is.
I think it used to be, so he was consigned to the basement for a time.
But it was about the importance of books, and it had this phrase about, you know, books won't stay burned, that idea is a better idea, and so on.
Which was, I mean, cool.
completely unacceptable and one agreed with every word of it, but it was slightly, um, slightly self-important, slightly embarrassing, having just stuck up on that.
Um, well, Tina Winer could tell you about Chester.
And she has some really, really, very interesting stories about him.
Especially from the female point of view, like, uh... Chester was not...
He used to say, I remember, female staff in New Haven, as they had children, he'd say, they'd think they'd invented motherhood.
Well, it's true.
He was an amazing guy.
Actually, I had a very considerable affection for him.
He was a monster, too.
He could behave very badly.
I mean, like all of us, he was very...
But really you're one of his triumphs.
Well, I was very lucky and I was in the right place at the right time.
And Chester was very supportive and so was the whole New Haven office, actually.
So it wasn't...
It was fun. It's quite a departure, though, I mean you have American university presses that have offices here but their sales offices are it's just something that you can put on the copyright page or the title page. You can't really regard them as legitimate divisions of. No no that's right. Acting as a publisher though, really. But what we were
The reason Chester hired me was it was all to do with the Mellon Centre and it was sorting out problems back in New Haven.
I don't know how much of this history you know, but the Mellon Centre had been set up by Paul Mellon in the 60s and it spent money like water.
Yeah, and I can actually put some numbers on it, because they did a huge book on Hogarth, a two-volume book by Ron Paulson on Hogarth, and they spent £70,000 on printing, 3,000 copies of it, in 1969, which would be about a million pounds now, or a bit more.
It's almost inconceivable that they could have found anyone to take so much money off them, but they did.
It was set in hot metal, it was done in Holland, which then was not cheap.
It was done very beautifully, but that's the resulting poet's cousin.
It was not really a piece of fine bookmaking at all.
They were spending this money at a prodigious rate, and Mellon's lawyers, I suppose, told him that he also reigned them in.
And the way he did this was to
fold it back into the museum that he was building in New Haven.
And the university took on the obligations to run the Mellon Sector, which basically existed to collect photographs, to give some grants, and to act into a research centre in the UK.
And it had this publishing commitment, serious publishing commitments, which were trivial, actually.
I mean, it had published maybe ten books, eight books, and it had contracts to do four or five more.
That obligation was passed by the university to the press in Iceland for about 69, 70.
And the press, just being a good fit, said, OK, they'd pick that up and do the books.
What the press didn't realise, or Chester didn't realise, was that these four or five books would involve him or someone at the press dealing with some fairly complicated, ambitious, difficult, opinionated Brits.
and he hired a rather nice woman called Robin Bledsoe who he gave the job of producing these books out of New Haven and she was way at her death and couldn't cope with these senior arrogant greedy kind of needy people and so the first two or three books produced by the press out of New Haven were not significantly more
successful in terms of economy and in terms of efficiency than the ones that have been done previously by the Foundation.
And I think Robin then resigned.
And Chester decided, rightly, that the only way to handle it, to sort this out, is actually to produce the books in the UK.
And not only did Robin decide to resign, but Ellis Waterhouse, who was the old dinosaur running in the World Foundation.
Yes, thanks.
He also retired at Ellis Waterhouse.
He was a grand old man of English art history.
He used to be in the pleasure of Birmingham for a long time.
He'd written a standard history of 18th century paintings.
And he was replaced by
And this was replaced by a very, not okay.
Yeah, something.
a little replaced by a very nice um brain who had been at the British Museum and went to Washington to the National Gallery, um had been keeping um drawings there, called Christopher White and he was he'd been unhappy in Washington and had come back to take this job, which was a job that was not and not a job that really stretched him. I mean a job that was
It's a fairly easy job.
But Christopher was desperate to go back to Britain.
Thanks.
And he, quite coincidentally, was a sort of remote friend of mine.
I'd had feelings with him.
Thanks, I'm sorry.
And I suspect that Chester knew that or found that out.
And so he decided to hire me.
I think to solve a political problem that he got in New Hope, with these books giving trouble, and with the concern that I was almost still there, I don't know, it was my last look, that the Melbourne lawyers would get twitchy, and things had to be done that kept the Melbourne lawyers happy.
And so he decided to give me the job of doing these books.
And I knew Chester very slightly from... Now, you had been at Oxford, I think.
I was at Oxford, I remember.
The reason I knew Chester was because I remember.
So I knew Robin.
When he hired Robin, I had applied for that job.
I was getting... I was becoming persona non grata at Oxford.
I'd been there five years, six years.
Now, why were you getting persona non grata?
I'd fallen out with my boss and, you know, becoming up and see in difficult.
And, you know, the way people do when they've been there five or six years and think they should be in charge and they're not, you know?
And Oxford was...
yeah whatever you say about whatever anybody says about yale oxford was a complete shambles of the 60s i mean it was a nightmare publishing place nightmare business it was quite i mean it's very interesting they published wonderful books um and i learned all kinds of things there was a business it was complete disaster and it was it took
It made life difficult for its junior employees.
It didn't nurture them or value them.
It was run like a sort of Oxbridge College.
Entirely in the interests of the fellows.
And the sort of senior members.
But that's why Chester knew me.
At any rate, he invited me.
So you were ready to move?
I was ready to move, yeah.
And my wife-to-be was then already working.
I think I was married, I think.
She was already working in London and she was a publisher as well.
She was a publisher too.
She lived in London, I lived in Oxford.
So there was a lot of travel and I was ready to meet.
But the thing that I guess made it all worthwhile was when Chester, I can remember when he interviewed me, he was saying, there are these three, four books that we're committed to and you can do some more.
And I said, well, that's
Yeah that is never going to make a publishing list and you can't make a publishing list in my view just out of books about British Art anyway. And so he said well so can I do other books as well, and he said yes and I said what I want to do and he said well any books that are
appropriate for a university press and I'd been doing history books and a little bit of literature as well as literature but in effect I don't think he realised this I don't think I realised it really but he gave me carte blanche really to publish an academic list you know any academic list that I could reasonably sort of justify and so
I think I was luckier than I realised.
You were a kid too, right?
Well, I was 28 or something.
Well, they get younger.
I mean, I went to Amazon the other day and the people there were like about 19.
Yeah, I was quite young.
But it was... There was a pre-existing business here, which was, I think, four people.
I think I was a thick.
And it was...
just selling New Haven's books in Europe, as best it could.
And there was a slight... and Yale has always had a strong... English-list has always been strongly-anglish-centric.
There had been one book that Yale had published in Rather,
dramatic circumstances, which was a sort of spy thriller.
Do you know the story of the double-cross system?
Have you been told about that?
That wasn't mine, but it was one of Chester's greatest exploits.
And Chester worked for the CIA, so he was... They say they all gailed.
I'm sorry, Robert said he didn't really know that.
The CIA is like a great pipeline.
had came out of that world.
I said, my God, he looks like John Foster Dulles, isn't he?
Chester claimed to be left wing.
Well, he was.
He had left wing kind of aspirations.
But he was a humane man in some ways.
But Chester
came out of this world, and he was, I think, finished with it.
But in the 60s, it's going a long way, isn't it?
In Britain, there was an obsessive sort of fascination with spies, of course, partly the Soviet spies, but actually what I'm talking about with German spies, Second World War spies, and the whole Enigma business, and what had been going on in Bletchley Park, and code-breaking and so on.
Who doesn't love to read about that?
Exactly.
And there was this guy...
called John Masterman, who by this point, by 68, 69, had become master of an Oxford college.
But during the war,
had been something in the Foreign Office.
And it had been his job at the end of the war to write a report about what they called the double-cross system, which was a mechanism by which I think every German spy in Britain had become a double agent or was in any way under control of
the British Secret Service and the Germans didn't know this and so all the information that they got fed back to them was wrong and he'd written a report about this in 546 and come 1966-67 he wanted to publish it really out of his pension I mean like politicians do now in those days they didn't and the Foreign Office wouldn't allow him to and said it was an official secret not permitted and Masterman being
He was a funny bloke, actually.
He was a sort of guy who was in the Foreign Office and then becomes head of an Oxford College.
I mean, very, very self-confident.
He pleases himself and basically continues himself to be above these kind of rules.
And he decided that if he wasn't going to be allowed to publish it in the UK, he'd publish it in America.
I don't know how he knew Chester, whether that was another wartime connection or whether that was through somebody else.
But anyway, he sent it, sent the manuscript to Yale, and Yale published it.
They then imported back into the UK, and it was a huge success and it sold 50 60 buying copies. Can I interrupt this for a second? Is it known that Chester was CIA? Certainly known that it's, yeah I think so yeah no I think I'm sure that's right. Yeah you know I mean I wrote in my last book nobody seemed to have known that but I don't know what happened the Houghton Library oh right
The guy, I think he's just died, Robin Wicks, is he dead?
He knew all about Chester's background.
Did he write about it?
Well yes, he wrote a book called Yale, he wrote a book about Yale and Spike, didn't he?
I don't even have to ask anybody if it's in there.
I think it's important.
No, I'm not.
Because he did a lot of neo-climb books.
Chester did.
Chester did?
Yeah, Chester did.
This kind of thing is going to be unthinkable today.
When did he do that?
According to Johann Heiden.
Very little New York thing.
I don't know about that.
I've got the transcript of my writing for that interview with me today.
I'll go and get it exactly since it's right here today.
Well, at least... This is going to be a fun little book.
You know what I like about it?
Is that it has such little expectations.
Maybe they expect it to be a special thing or something like this, you know?
Yeah.
I think I'm going to come in and write something that's going to be... It's going to be an interesting book with stories.
Well, that's fun.
And otherwise, why bother?
You know, I mean, I'm... Why bother?
Yeah.
Go on.
I think if you can make it a funny story, that will be... There must be people at Yale who... Well, you know what the... The challenge is for me, is that my editor in Harper is having a few Van Dusen, good old guy.
Van Dusen, he's... Yeah, he's a kind of drunk.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, but this is not how we connected.
I mean, this is his editor.
It's my last book.
Yeah.
And I thought that he'd be... I think he was so excited.
Anyway, Masterman did this book.
Chester published it, made a big success of it.
He became something of a celebrity in London circles, because he'd been two fingers to the government.
He became very friendly with Joe Crook, who was then the editor of the CLS, who was an admirer and friend of Chester's.
He sort of fancised himself as a British publisher.
You think that was what encouraged him to embark on this?
Yeah, I don't think... There were two things encouraging him.
One was the success of The Mastermind, and the other was that he was desperately keen to have an excuse to come to London every six months, three months to go to the theatre.
Yeah, he did.
I mean, he enjoyed it.
He was a man who enjoyed British culture, society, and particularly Scottish culture and society.
He got involved in restoring some old castle up in Jedburgh.
Which, funny enough, the Yale Press, the existing, right now, Yale Press, had just published last month a book.
We published a series of architectural guides for him.
Just published a volume on the Borders.
It has a whole bit about...
Chester's castle outside of Jedra and how it was restored 20 years ago.
Is Chester in the book?
No, not the family.
But Chester, you know, panting in Scotland is Scotland.
He enjoyed very much the theater.
He liked staying in nicer hotels.
I think he found you having a bit, you know, provincial.
He actually had perception to see that he was initiating something that would become almost unique about the numerical university presses.
I have no idea.
He might have done that.
Robert said this morning, I asked him, I said, do you think that the University Press London division is a British publisher?
He said, I think it is.
Would you agree with that?
I'm sorry.
I'm glad I don't know.
That's fascinating.
I think the answer is no.
I think he did have a perception because I think although it suited him as basic as what he just suggested, like coming here and there.
I think it suited him personally, but it didn't particularly suit him politically or professionally because I think one of the reasons why I enjoyed myself so much for those 20 years working for Yale was basically because Navy New Havens had any serious interest in what we were doing.
So you had a ton of things.
So we had freedom, yeah.
It was only when they began to take the interest that it got kind of more oppressive and kind of less fun.
John Wright's words were, for a period, you were at their cash cow.
Yeah, we were.
But they would never admit that.
I mean, he said it after.
No, he would not.
He only admitted it after.
They never said so at the time.
I mean, I knew.
He said it.
I knew.
But nobody else did.
Nobody did in the book.
Yeah, yeah, well, fine.
But probably it should be.
But no one else in New Haven would at that point have admitted it or have even recognized it.
I mean, it was, oh, because they didn't think in those terms.
And nobody said it in public, ever.
I mean, I'm amused that John should say it now, because obviously it was true.
And he said it to me at the time.
But it suited, I think it suited John in the same way it suited Chester.
not, excuse me, not overplay it.
Because I wouldn't find my ambitions to interfere with what happened in New Haven.
I just didn't want them to interfere too much.
So what were your ambitions?
Did you have ambitions or was it?
You didn't have any ambitions.
That's a terrible question.
I mean, our ambition is to publish as many details.
Do you have a vision?
No.
Certainly not a vision.
No, I mean, was it Morris Philipson at Princeton?
Yeah, he was at Chicago, wasn't he?
He was a guy.
The old codger at Princeton, I can't remember his name, who once said, the mission of the University Press, the job of the University Press is to publish as many decent books as it can without going bankrupt.
And I thought, I mean, that is roughly what I thought we should be trying to do.
And...
There were all kinds of fundamental... A extraordinary thing happened on the way to publishing these books.
We made quite a lot of money.
And the money was then dissipated by others.
Many of them in New Haven.
On the other side of the... Some of them here.
We dissipated our share of it.
Did you bring an firm business sense to the task?
I think that's not the way university presses are normally operated.
I don't know about in the UK, but in the United States, I think Yale is the only one that operates in the black.
If there's another one, I'd like to know what it is.
I think it is good.
Harvard Sunday?
No, I suppose I did.
I mean, I don't know quite where I got it from.
My father was a businessman, and my wife was a businesswoman, so I guess I sort of... But, I mean, of course, there is a fundamental issue there, which is not what we should be talking about, but one of the problems with the university press is that this...
cross-subsidy from the profitable books and the unprofitable books is usually done in a very secretive and undiscussed and usually probably rather inappropriate sort of way Thank you very much I'm not sure quite what the right way to do it would be but usually it's pretty sort of murky just how you decide which books you take on
that aren't going to make money, which ones should ask, that there's very... So that has to be a higher purpose then?
Well, it should be, it should be, but it's not, and there's no adequate mechanism to do it.
As if Ebi Yosier, an editor-in-law meeting, and you say, well, this book is really good, but it's going to lose £10,000.
Everybody else in our television says, well, we don't want these £10,000.
And he says it's really good, but he says his book's really good and it's going to make £10,000.
So, you know, there is never any real honesty or transparency about this.
And I'm not sure there can be.
But we had lots of luck.
We had the Mellon books that were no kind of drain on Yale's parlance.
And we managed to make some of them successful, surprisingly.
And then we were in the right place because Illustrated Publishing, which is what I just happened to be interested in.
I should say that was almost inspired.
It has, yeah.
But in the late 70s, early 80s, it was booming and growing.
And it was easy to do, and it was much easier to do in England than it was in America.
And so, you know, it was just a matter of being in the right place at the right time, and having the right interests, and being able to take advantage of them and exploit them.
Well, I can say I was a book review editor in Massachusetts from 1978 to 1991 when I left to write my books.
And then I continued to write.
I still write.
book reviews and get reviews done.
And I would say, without any clarification, one of the reasons I decided to take this Yale offer was because of the extraordinary regard and respect and admiration I have had over the last 30 years for the art books that I have said, in front of me, that
The finest art books published in the world, as far as I'm concerned, without any qualification are the Yale books.
I mean, I forget about them.
We used to do some nice books.
Not only for the exquisite nature of their design and their production, but the level and the depth of the scholarship is fantastic.
And it continues.
And it's not just one or two a year.
It's 10, 12, 15 a year.
And it's just unremitting.
They come one after the other.
I keep them.
I never sent them out for review.
I kept them for myself and did them myself.
I don't quite know what to say.
I mean, obviously I appreciate very much what you're saying.
entirely think you're wrong.
Well, that's very nice of you, and I'm flattered.
What inspires you?
I mean, what elevates them?
So why is it that so many others are unable to do what you did and what Yale, I think, continues to do quite remarkably?
I hope we're not going off track, but I really do want to talk about The Night Book.
University press to be doing that. I don't know I mean other university questions do an occasional. I mean we were we were very lucky. I mean it not really was a major part of it and I'm very touched by what you say there and it's quite I mean apart from John occasionally John occasionally one-to-one saying nice things about this no one said it in print over the years. Well reviewers do say I'm afraid
I've got extremely thick skin not to say what reviewers say very seriously.
I can't take what reviewers say very seriously in case they say nasty things because I have to ignore that too.
But it is very gratifying the way in which the books have been received.
And I think it's probably fair to say that I'm
I was intermittently hurt or slightly puzzled that no one except John and Rollins occasionally seemed to know.
I mean the president of the university had no idea what we were doing for instance when I was introduced to him not so very long ago.
They had no understanding of what we were doing at all.
I wouldn't expect them to have much, but I would have thought they might have just... That's a surprise.
Well, I mean, I was not... I was not bothered by that, because it just meant they weren't looking, which was fine.
Sometimes it's a bit of a thing, aren't they?
Absolutely.
That's exactly what I thought.
um but i but the only reason you were able to do it was because britain was the right country to be in no other competition was was feeble i mean no other
University Press was interested in illustrated books.
Isn't it interesting that a university press can pick this up?
Why didn't a trade publisher pick it up?
Well, some trade publishers did, but they weren't interested in serious artists.
What you might call illustrated books were reinvented in Britain in the 1970s and 80s by people like Dolan Kindersley and Walker Books and Mitchell Beasley and at some level my wife, who were
taking advantage of new technologies to produce illustrated books and sell them to big American publishers like Simon Schuster and Reader's Digest, and very large numbers.
At one level, I was just sort of coattailing on that.
We were just coattailing on that.
In a culture where academic presses thought that books for pictures were basically children, grown-ups didn't need pictures, and where
Trade publishers.
Funny, I learned more about this as I grow older, but my new kind of retired trade publishers who were active in the 70s and 80s, they all thought had been led to believe by their production departments or whoever that picture books were just endless trouble and you couldn't get them right.
and that it was much more fun to publish novels or publish high profile political memoirs or whatever, or even history books, which it perhaps was.
And the satisfaction that comes from art books is not really the reviews or the sales necessarily, it's actually
the sense of producing a beautiful, satisfactory book.
It's a sort of physical thing.
Some of that book that pleases you.
Yeah, quite a book that pleases everybody who has to do with it.
But, you know, the history book looks alright or not, it doesn't matter too much.
With an art book, you've got to feel that the author is satisfied with it, or the institution that might have sponsored it.
And one has to be satisfied with it oneself.
Because we were so good, it was just me, I got very involved in the design and production of books.
I was just anticipating my next question, because that's exactly what John said.
He didn't use the phrase, I'll find it.
You can just keep going.
Well, I remember the first book about design.
I was rather proud of it.
I showed it to my father.
And he said, John, I think it was a real pest.
We kind of cleaned it up, but it was all over the place.
Here's a giant book.
He says, you did a very unusual thing.
He said you wanted to be able to control the quality of the production, the product, the production quality of the book.
He used the phrase engine work.
That was one of his phrases, yeah.
Workshop.
Make it look right.
Then he also mentioned it.
I used to
love... Is that kind of an interesting phrase? He's actually right. I mean have you ever been to a print work. I mean do you know about them, but have you been there all night? Well I mean those printing presses are um well somebody said I'm not sure this is true that you know that the only thing really compared to is steam engines that they have this huge kind of discoral kind of um power
and authority, a rather comforting kind of noise that they make, not unlike steam engines with lots of air, hissing and so on.
It's not a frightening kind of machine, but you have this impression of things being made there and down, and you can tweak them, you can adjust them.
And when you're printing an artwork, a 24-hour shift, you have to be around all the time.
And in those days,
it made a difference.
Nowadays, the technology is so sophisticated that actually it's pretty much a waste of time to be there because it's all going to be whatever you've given them is what you're going to get.
But in those days, it was still a craft to a considerable degree.
So I actually remember the first time it had been said to me, well, the computer... So you actually went down there for the rents?
I spent lots of time.
And so where were the books actually produced?
Well, over the place.
So you would go to all these plants and supervise these actual production?
Oh, yeah.
And I spent a lot of time in...
Initially we printed them in the UK in the 70s.
And they're all now bankrupt except for one printer's roundabout in England and Scotland.
And then we started printing in Italy.
And I spent a lot of my life in Milan.
Well, in the rather seedier suburbs of Milan.
And in the middle of the night in fog and snow.
And then in Hong Kong.
And then in Singapore.
So yes, I used to spend three or four weeks a year as the office and printers.
What were you looking for?
Well, when you're printing, you're looking for two things.
You're looking for mistakes that you can fix at the last minute, but basically... Registration, colour... Basically, mistakes are, you know, things are actually wrong, otherwise it's a massive degree.
And with colour printing, even with black and white printing in those days,
by being there.
You could say, no, I don't like that.
It's got to be better.
They throw away the... Oh, yeah, yeah.
It's very good, thanks.
Oh, sure they would.
They would take the job off the press and redo it.
And printers are... It has changed, but standards were terribly, terribly low.
In Britain, they were appallingly low.
Even in Italy, they weren't.
not that high, and they were higher in the Far East.
But another pair of eyes, a critical pair of eyes, a customer's eyes, sees things that the operative on the press, who basically just wants to get home and wants to produce an acceptable job, doesn't necessarily see.
And colour printing is quite a
an artful game.
There are the problems of tracking, this picture running with that picture, this picture's got a woman in a red dress, this picture's got a picture of snow or something.
It's no surprise that snow gets a bit pink because there's so much red ink to paint the red dress, to print the red dress.
That's an unavoidable issue.
But someone has to strike a compromise.
And you either let the printer take the picture, so it's usually, well, I've got these two proofs, nice red dress, nice white snow.
The snow gets a bit pink.
Let back keep the red dress, because the prints are like... So what drove you to do this?
Did you have some disasters in the random?
I mean... Oh, yeah.
That's unacceptable.
It's outrageous.
Why did I... You say, why did I?
Because I knew already that that was the only way to get it done properly.
And it started... It started in the UK.
So you saw the books that were being produced and obviously they were hopeless.
They were inadequate.
They were unsatisfactory.
And I knew that the anywhere I was going to get them right was to go there and sit on the press to make sure they did it.
So how much time would you spend there?
Would you actually stay for the whole line?
Yeah.
Yes.
Oh, for the big books, the important books.
The Max Gerard book, for instance?
Yeah, yeah.
That was...
That was actually physically a relatively easy book.
Oh, it had a real desire to do.
But that's one of your great, really... Yeah, it was very, very successful, but it wasn't... But it's not one of those, the artful tool plates and the colour separation.
I saw all of that book being printed.
So if I look at it now, I think, God, won't those standards be accepted in those days?
But by going there, I'm going to a printer.
It's a bit like watching the builders.
I mean, you don't really know...
how to lay the bricks, or the nuances of good and bad bricklaying.
If the customer's there, watching and caring and taking an interest, the bricklayer, the printer, realizes he's got to raise his game a bit.
That there's someone there who cares.
And of course they, most of them, care too.
And so if there is someone who's interested, and who asks questions, and says, why isn't this as good as that?
And can we make this better?
What can we do?
I mean, then you see it in an adversarial kind of way.
They'll say, well, yeah, we probably could if we did this.
And they'd get, yeah, okay.
It's a seduction as well as a carrot as well as a stick.
So I used to spend a lot of time, and my colleagues, when we grew...
My colleagues who sort of took over the design and production of the editing books, who I recruited, they all spent a lot of time with printers too.
And it's only stopped, I suppose, in the mid-90s, by which point, and gradually became clear in the early 90s, we felt that each visit to a printer achieved less.
Because really they could do it.
They got it right most of the time.
Initially they got it wrong.
But standards were transformed between 75 and 95.
Plus the equipment got better.
The technology got better.
That's right.
And now... It probably wasn't digital when you started.
Certainly wasn't that.
And the machines were old.
And standards generally were low.
Nobody expected proofs to be matched on first.
The question was, what compromises did you make?
And I'd rather make those compromises myself than entrust them to some half-educated Italian.
I mean, not to be... Probably couldn't read English, right?
Well, it certainly couldn't read English.
And the irony, of course, with Italians is that they all think they know what Fiore della Francesca should look like.
But they didn't claim to know what impressionists look.
So beyond production, which is...
exacting them, such as I've never come in contact with the content, developing the list.
I have a question of advice, really, of knowing who to ask.
I think academic publishing is quite easy, if you know where to go for advice.
And it's not from trade publishing.
You don't have to have a feel for it.
You've got to have a sense of whether people are going to be interested in something.
And if they are, it'll work.
But the judgment as to whether the book's any good when it comes in is a sort of, usually in my terms, a sort of common man's judgment.
Yes, it's literate.
Yes, it seems to touch the bases.
Yes, it's witty.
It's stylish.
It's whatever.
We'll publish it.
But with an academic book,
It's more difficult than that.
You've got to know whether he really or she really has seen all the right archives and read all the right articles and thought all the appropriate thoughts.
And that's a pretty tricky game, especially when it's an area you don't know anything about, which basically one doesn't.
So, you know, someone's writing a history of Byzantia or something.
or particularly a social history of you know some aspects of the ottoman or by the entire administration into eastern anatolia between 1100 and 1200 who's going to tell you whether what they say is um is worth publishing and that is quite tricky and i don't know but i think i would probably know who i could ring
who would tell me who would know who, and then you have to make a judgment about how good that judgment is.
But I mean, what I always did, and it's just funny, because there's a conflict with what the Yale Convention was.
I used to use a very small circle of advisers who would tell me what they thought was good, and who they thought was good, and usually... From here?
From the UK?
Yeah.
Oh, mostly, because that's why most of my contacts were not entirely, no, some of them in America.
But they would usually be pretty kind of curt and perpetuity about it and say, you know, Smith is...
is good, he's doing interesting work, and you should certainly publish anything that he does.
And I can remember the time of hysterics who were in New Haven when I would produce a written report because they would say, the publication's because he doesn't explain why he thinks Smith is any good, he doesn't say why he's doing interesting work, he doesn't demonstrate this at all, how can we take his opinion seriously?
And you say, well, because his name's Isaiah Berlin or something, and they would say, well, I'd rather have
a properly argued case from a person from somewhere else.
And I used to have to plead with my advisors sometimes to at least get their reports over to the second side of the sheet of paper so that Carol looked as they had done their homework.
But that was...
How I didn't answer this was by sort of getting what I thought was good advice.
So you spent at least half your life with Gail, 30 years?
Yeah, 30 years, from 73 to 2002.
Did you enjoy it?
Oh, was it 2002?
No, 2003.
No, 2004.
Only one year.
Oh yeah, I had a fantastic time.
And I loved it.
I was very, very lucky.
And what could be nicer than having
a wealthy benevolent benign owner who's 3,000 miles away.
That's great.
I love it.
Now, how often did you have to go to New Haven?
Was that fun?
Was that interesting?
It reminds me of Chester.
Chester hired me.
I had to say to him, I didn't sort of think CIA people used to it, it's just I got a confession to me.
So what's a confession?
It's that I'm too frightened to get in an aeroplane.
I'm not prepared to come to America.
Oh, you said this.
Oh, were you serious?
Oh yeah, absolutely.
I'm not prepared to come to America on an airplane.
I'm only prepared to take this problem.
So if I can come by ship.
So he said, well, that's ridiculous.
And that's how it is.
And for me, it's not negotiable.
So he took his, I suppose, credit, but maybe not.
He said, OK, and he put it in my little conditions.
This is in the 70s, too.
That's right.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And of course, what was clever?
I'm not talking VC3.
No, no, no.
I guess he knew.
and maybe I knew that he knew, that I wasn't always getting serious about this.
I mean, I was serious, but I think he knew that I would back down on it.
And I did.
And I forced myself to fly.
So how often did you go?
So about four times a year.
Really?
What were they like?
Did you dread them?
Did you enjoy them?
Well, I hated flying, but I got used to it after a bit.
I had a very close friend who hated flying too, and he used to swap anecdotes.
You would not have wanted to be on the planet last night.
We just went from 40,000 feet to 28,000 feet to just kind of fine and comfortable.
It was bumpy all the way.
Not all the way, but where it wasn't, where it was bumpy, it was bumpy.
I'm fairly relaxed about flying now.
It was just so... But it was a...
a period of my life where I was very, very... apprehensive about it.
I know all the Iraq policies and everything, but I certainly do now.
I did them.
But what did I think of going there?
I hated the flying.
And, well, you've been to New Haven.
Oh, I've lived 90 years.
Well, that's decent history.
That's one of the reasons I didn't agree to do this like this.
I'd first been to New Haven before I...
I joined the press.
I had been there when I worked for Oxford, and I'd been there as a student.
I hadn't studied there, but as a student I'd gone to America and I'd binged me home.
It's not really the Athens of the East Coast.
It's certainly not the... I always find it a very depressing place.
Parts of it are nice, but the demographics have become such that it's really very scary.
I think they've always been.
I mean, I first went there in 66, 67.
And it seemed pretty scary then.
They were burning it down.
I mean, every year you can count on at least one male student being murdered by a county.
Yeah.
That's scary.
Yeah, it is.
I have two daughters, you know, college graduates.
No, not at Yale, but, you know, Tufts and Smith.
But, you know, it's like going to Columbia, you know.
Columbia is a great school, but we'll go where it is.
But Columbia is at least in New York.
You go on the subway in some minutes.
That's right.
Well, we can get up for, you know, 1.35 or whatever it is.
But, no, Yale is, I love Yale.
I don't know.
A lot of people at Yale were extremely nice to me and gave me a very good time and interesting time and fun time.
I had my share of people who were arrogant and difficult in the way that you would in any university.
I don't have any huge affection for us in the institution because I don't
I just used to go there for two or three days and then come back.
Actually, my affection is for the press.
Oh, the press is slightly different.
Well, it is.
In fact, for half of its existence, it wasn't even owned by the university.
Well, it was.
They gave it to the university in return for the freehold on that property, isn't it?
It was a private corporation.
I mean, the first guy, only for 50 or 60 years has it been part of the university.
Gaddis Smith is doing a history of the university, and he's not including the press.
And I said, why not?
He said, well, it's only, you know, he told me a few things he thought I should look at, you know, a couple of political, a couple of books that were published in the 1930s that would never be published.
I mean, they were really,
covered this anti-Franklin Roosevelt polemics.
Oh, really?
Leave it to the historian to give me that.
I said, check this out.
It should be in there.
So I think it's going to be a fun little book.
I'm going to have fun for that.
As I said, I live 90 minutes from the place.
I drive down there to do two or three interviews.
They gave me graduate students.
This is unprecedented.
Who's that?
I don't even know how to use her.
So what does she do?
Yes, I've been told that, but I've forgotten that.
Well, Bennett Cerf had given his word to you, John O'Neill, that he wouldn't publish this, because it's so autobiographical.
And then he died, and then the widow said, well, we're going to do it.
through his words of, well, I can't do it.
So Neil, which had the book, said, well, we can do it.
And they did in that book.
That's their best-selling book.
Absolutely.
I wish we had the UK rise.
But we never did.
You sold the drunken cake.
Anyway, very, very... I interrupted you.
What were we talking about?
We were talking about printing.
No.
Acquiring books.
And I was just saying it was... Did you ever do textbooks?
Did you ever feel that you should... I totally shouldn't.
But John said that's one of the things that Yale did, that textbooks, art books,
and what was the other thing three things that yale did which is uh well did you feel that you should be supporting any kind of a curriculum or anything like that so basically the name is of the university press that you can largely proceed
As far as I was concerned, it was all tertiary levels.
Publishing.
Yeah.
And it was publishing at a fairly serious level for academics and for the interested general reader.
It was not for students.
I'm looking at it as a title, but actually, that's worth it.
Keep going.
Sorry, I've finished, I think.
Publishing at a fairly serious level.
That's not bad, is it?
Well, no, it could do.
It's a bit English.
It's double negative.
We can work it.
I really need to settle it.
That's what I thought we were trying to do.
And this is where one comes back to the... We're trying to keep the show on the road, but trying to justify the charitable status, as it were, that one...
Now, you went to Oxford.
I did, yeah.
And you worked for the press.
I left the Claremont Press, which I think was quite a good, gave me quite a good grounding in academic publishing and its kind of conventional sort of practices and sort of principles.
But do you have a process to what a university press ought to be?
I think I know that I don't know what universities are supposed to be.
I mean, I have thought about it quite hard.
And I think I know that no one at Yale ever really wanted to talk about it, I think, because... Sorry, I'm not supposed to interrupt you.
No, but I... And I can see why they didn't want to talk about it, because it would beg all kinds of questions about what we did and why we did it and whether we should be doing it.
And it was much easier just to...
point to the books and say, well, that's a pretty distinguished collection.
And looking back... Oh, my proper picture.
No, don't.
Well, me.
Yeah.
Everywhere.
I have everything.
Okay.
It was much easier for everyone to point to the books and say, that's a pretty distinguished collection of books and only 10% of them do we need to be ashamed of and another...
10% we need to kind of perhaps have reservations about.
And it's really difficult to ask the questions, or to answer the questions, as to why did you think this one was worth doing?
And was it really worth doing?
Because perhaps it wasn't.
And those are the questions that I think nobody wanted to have raised, not least me.
I mean, I wouldn't particularly want to have to justify every book that I did.
And you publish a lot of books because you couldn't think of a decent reason not to publish them, actually.
The author was personable, the subject was self-evidently kind of interesting to somebody.
It appeared as though it was going to be a good book.
It obviously was a good book.
As far as you can tell, you're going to sell some, so why not publish it?
And it was never, there was never the time, I mean, it's not like HarperCollins, or Darlene Kindersley, where you are not going to do a book unless you think you're going to sell 10,000 copies, and I hope you're going to sell 100,000 copies.
You can spend a lot of time discussing
whether you should do this or that, whether this really is satisfactory and sufficient, because there is enough time, there's enough revenue there to support that kind of time.
Editors don't need to be particularly productive.
10, 15 books a year is probably enough.
With the university press, actually, you have to keep cranking the stuff out, because a lot of these books are going to sell 500,000 copies.
Many of them have a $25 price point, or less.
They're not going to earn much money for anybody.
So unless you do quite a lot, the economics really aren't spout, and if you're going to do quite a lot, you've got to take decisions quite quickly.
You can't spend too long debating whether it's quite good enough or quite the right subject or the best book that could be written on the subject.
You just have to say yes or no.
I think that's being realistic.
I don't know what the university press is for.
I see it as a department of the university.
At some level, it exists to publish research emanating from the university and the published books.
Something has to distinguish it from the trade.
Otherwise, what's its reason for being?
I'm not in the business of founding university presses.
If you were to set up a new university and say, should it have a university press?
But they all exist.
I mean, you know, that's... They've evolved.
I mean, according to John, again, Wright, you know, the American University Press begins at about the same time that you have the professionalization of scholarship in the United States.
And it's served a function there.
That's not necessarily the case anymore.
I mean, Yale doesn't even... I mean, if you're a Yale professor, that may go against you trying to get your book.
Yeah, that was...
That's new.
When I started, it counted in your favour.
I thought that was a very bad thing.
I think it should probably count against you.
Do you think it probably should count against you?
Well, I'm joking, but it should be difficult.
It certainly shouldn't count in your favour, actually.
I think the press should be completely indifferent, in the same way that I wouldn't give
preference to um the children of the one night. Otherwise it looks like a vanity press. Exactly. It is what may be true is that there are certain strengths in the university, certain bits of the university that have ongoing programs or what have you that the press is bought into and that's fine. I don't have problems about that, but if it's just any old history professor who's written any old history book then I don't have any um because if once that happens I mean
One of the issues at Oxford, which I think they handled quite well, which is 35 years ago, was maintaining a distance from the university.
And they were very... I suppose I kind of put that in a bit with my training.
But keeping one's distance from the university was very important because if they thought they had you in that pocket, there were a lot of very powerful people, very ambitious, very ruthless, who would have no compunction about taking advantage of it.
And one had to be careful about that.
When I joined Yale, I felt that was not something that people were worried about anything like enough.
And it seemed to me there was clear evidence of second-rate books, or third-rate books, being published because they were written by the student of a professor and so on.
And I thought, that's no way to...
he hopes to run an academic company.
In my view of that.
Sure, they are.
And there are always going to be some of them.
And they're always worthless books.
But if you publish a worthless book on the stage... That's where the internet can really do something good.
Well, it can't stop you publishing worthless books.
But at least it provides a way to get their things done.
Well, that's $150 to buy a stupid little monograph that... Of course.
But the distinction is between the monograph that no one's ever going to read, which they should read, and those which they're absolutely right not to read.
And the tricky bit is that, you know, you're the fancy professor, and this is your possibly glamorous blonde student who's written the monograph.
Very good.
I'll have a double espresso.
Just regular, Joe.
I hesitate to call it American coffee.
But that's where a university press is kind of special.
You can afford to spend money on books that people won't buy, and you think, well, I've done a good thing.
But of course, if you do it on books people should never have bought, then it's a complete waste.
But I mean, there are some issues there that I, to be honest, have never
properly addressed because it gets quite uncomfortable.
It's a bit like charity, triage.
What are some of the issues that you've never properly addressed?
Well, the issues of just what is the university press for?
That's a good question.
Yeah, exactly.
And I've never addressed it.
It's there to promote sponsorship and so on.
But just how does it do it and how does it differentiate itself from a commercial publisher?
And if it only publishes the books that are uneconomic, that's fair enough.
But then it's
it's it's really a and that's not publishing that's kind of charity that's um that's oxfam it's feeding and starving and people who can't cope and this odd sort of conjunction of business and sort of entrepreneurship and um scholarship is is um it's eccentric and it's
It's tricky.
Maybe it's better if it's a private corporation.
What's remarkable to see is that you're a publisher and you happen to have worked for a university.
That's a nice flashing thing to say, but I suppose, yeah, I mean, I would like to think of myself.
My conclusion, I'm writing a book.
And this is what maybe makes you so refreshing on the scene.
I don't mean to flatter you here.
I'm trying to come up with something here, which...
I mean, you've had university presses here for half a millennia.
We've only had them.
Yale is celebrating its centennial in 08, and it's the third and oldest in the U.S.
by two or three years.
Hopkins, Chicago, Princeton, Columbia, Yale.
That's about it.
A hundred years old.
To be realistic, Oxford and Cambridge, before 1908, weren't really university presses as we know them.
Really?
Well, a lot of Bibles and a few sort of Greek-Aladdin texts, I don't think people like Macaulay and so on didn't publish their books with Oxford in the 1860s, and John Stuart Mill,
Ruskin and... Actually Ruskin, funny enough, did publish one of his books at the Oxford University Press because he gave it as the Slade Lectures and the Slade Lectures were published by the OEP.
If you look at the serious books published in Britain in the late 19th century, they were by and large published by Oxford and Cambridge.
I think that's probably after the First War.
So they were all moving at the same time then?
I would say so, yeah.
Clarendon's history of the Great Rebellion, which financed the Clarendon press, was a... So what's driving it at that point?
It's the professionalisation of academic life.
So it's the same thing here as it is in the US?
I think so.
I hadn't actually thought that before, but I suspect that's right.
So that's a good point, did he make?
Yes, I think so.
Plus a few odd individuals.
I mean, the OUP had a rather... It had Chapman and Sison, who were both energetic, sort of, academics, monquet.